Scripts for using ARGs sampled by *ARGweaver* to analyze patterns of species differentiation - smc_to_stats
=======

This directory contains scripts that take *ARGweaver* ouptut files and create windowed summary stats.  Before running *ARGweaver*, long genomic scaffolds are typically split into overlapping ARG blocks. So the input to this pipeline is an *ARGweaver* output file (.SMC) per ARG block. The files generated by our analysis on *Sporophila* genomes are provided [here](http://compgen.cshl.edu/sporophila_args/).  The final product is a statistic table (.stat.bed) per genomic scaffold, with one line of stats per window. The pipeline summary:

**Input:**   SMC files (*.smc.gz)							                    - one per ARG block

**Step 1:**  Filter and trim the ARG blocks

**Step 2:**  Generate BED files  (*.bed.gz + *.bed.gz.tbi)	- one per ARG block, after filtering for length

**Step 3:**  Generate TREE files (*.tre.gz)							   - one per ARG block, after trimming

**Step 4:**  Generate STAT files (*.stat.gz)							  - one per ARG block (same # lines as TREE file)

**Step 5:**  Generate STAT BED file (*.stat.bed)					- one per genomic scaffold, line per window (20 kb)


------------

Setup
------------

- Run *ARGweaver* on your data sets. When splitting long scaffolds / chromosomes into smaller ARG blocks (~2Mb), make sure to mainain an overlap of ~100 kb, so that 50 kb can be trimmed from the edges.
- Put all *ARGweaver* output files  (.SMC.GZ ) in a single smc source dir
- Put all *ARGweaver* output log files  (.LOG) in a single log source dir
- The SMC and LOG files generated by our analysis of *Sporophila* genomes are provided [here](http://compgen.cshl.edu/sporophila_args/). 
- Create directory *infoTables/* in current directory
- Prepare sequencing species-individual key file (*infoTables/individual-species-key-modified.txt*). This file contains a table with a row per haploid sample in the data set (120 in our analysis) with the following columns: *Species*  (species name)   *Individual_hap* (haploid id)    *Color*  (RGB color code for species). See example in *sampleFiles/individual-species-key-modified-sporophila.txt* in root directory. 
- Set bash variable `$scriptDir` the path of **this** directory (the one containing these scripts).
- Follow the specific setup instructions of each step in the pipeline below


------------

Step 1 - Filter and trim ARG blocks
------------

**Input:**

- *ARGweaver* output files  (.SMC.GZ ) 

**Output:**

- *infoTables/ARGblock-coordinates.txt*   -   (columns: <SMC-file-path> <scaffold> <MCMCiter> <startIndex> <endIndex>)  
- *infoTables/ARGblock-coordinates-trimmed.txt*   -   (same format but coordinates after trimming and contains filtered set of ARG-blocks)  
- *infoTables/ARGblock-coordinates-info.txt*   -   (free text file with information on filtering) 

**Steps:**

``==> bash $scriptDir/create_arg_block_region_file.sh``

- **Setup:**  set smc source dir in script
- Creates ARG block coordinate file based on SMC files.

`==> Rscript $scriptDir/trim_arg_blocks.R `

- **Setup:**  set filtering and trimming parameters in script `trim_arg_blocks.R ` : (1) MCMC sampling iteration for filtering (default=1000); (2) minimum ARG block length for filtering (default=120,000); (3) window length (default =20,000); (4) trim size in each end of an ARG block (default=50,0000). The trim size should be at most half the length of the overlap between consecutive ARG blocks in the same scaffold to ensure complete coverage.
- Filters out short ARG blocks and SMC files generated in early MCMC iterations
  - Trims edges of each ARG block (according to overlap)
  - Computes a new region for each ARG block so that it contains an integer number of windows of given length (20kb in our default settings)


------------

Step 2 - Generate ARG bed files
------------

**Input:**

- *ARGweaver* output files  (.SMC.GZ ) 
- *infoTables/ARGblock-coordinates.txt*   (generated in **Step 1** above)

**Output:**

- *argBedFiles/<ARGblock>_out.<MCMCiter>.bed.gz*   -   (ARG BED files, one per ARG block)

  [ format for line in file: <scaffold> <startPos> <endPos> <MCMCiter=0> <Newick_tree> ]  

- *argBedFiles/<ARGblock>_out.<MCMCiter>.bed.gz.tbi*   -   (index files for ARG BED files)

- *infoTables/arg_blocks_with_no_bed.txt*   -   (list of ARG blocks that are filtered out and will not have a bed file) 

**Steps:**

``==> Rscript $scriptDir/make_command_lines_for_beds.R``

- **Setup:**  set smc source dir & log source dir in script; set MCMC sampling iteration (default=1000) & minimum ARG block length for filtering (default=100,000); set the number of parallel jobs that can run on your machine (default=20)
- Creates bash script ``create_bed_files.sh`` in current directory with ``Rscript`` calls to ``smc_to_bed.R`` for all ARG blocks after filtering. Adds ``wait`` command every *numJobs* jobs.

``==> bash ./create_bed_files.sh`` 

* **Setup:**  set appropriate path for  ``smc2bed`` program in the system call in script  ``smc_to_bed.R``.
* Runs ``smc_to_bed.R`` on all SMC files. Each run applies the  ``smc2bed`` program + compression with ``bgzip`` + indexing with ``tabix``.
* **This step is very time consuming.**


------------

Step 3 - Generate Tree files
------------

**Input:**

- ARG BED files  (.BED.GZ ; generated in **Step 2** above) 
- *infoTables/ARGblock-coordinates-trimmed.txt*  - (generated in **Step 1** above)

**Output:**

- *argTreeFiles/<scaffold>.<startInd>-<endInd>.<MCMCiter>.tre.gz*   -   (ARG TREE files, one per ARG block, ~15x smaller than BED)

  [ format for line in file: <position> <tree> ] 

**Steps:**

``==> Rscript $scriptDir/make_command_lines_for_trees.R``

- **Setup:**  set interval between sampled trees (default=500); set the number of parallel jobs that can run on your machine (default=20)
- Creates bash script ``create_tree_files.sh`` in current directory with ``Rscript`` calls to ``bed_to_tre.R`` for all ARG blocks with BED files (unless empty after trimming). Adds ``wait`` command every *numJobs* jobs.

``==> bash ./create_tree_files.sh``

* Runs ``bed_to_tre.R`` on all BED files. Each run applies ``tabix`` to extract trimmed regions in BED file, and then extracts trees in specified intervals (default=500). Resulting file is compressed with ``gzip``.


------------

Step 4 - Generate Stat files
------------

**Input:**

- ARG tree files  (.TRE.GZ ; generated in **Step 3** above)
- *infoTables/individual-species-key-modified.txt* - to map haploid samples to species

**Output:**

- *argStats/<scaffold>.<startInd>-<endInd>.<MCMCiter>.stat.gz*   -   (ARG STAT files, one per ARG block, 10-20 times smaller than TRE)

  [ format for line in file (one line per tree): <TMRCAH-all> <RT12> <spe1-RTH>  . . . <spe1-enrich>  . . .] 

  [  these are all statistics used in test 1 (enrichment scores) & test 2 (RTH'); Cross coalescence times are not windowed ]

**Steps:**

``==> Rscript $scriptDir/make_command_lines_for_stats.R``

- **Setup:**  set the number of parallel jobs that can run on your machine (default=20)
- Creates bash script ``create_stat_files.sh`` in current directory with ``Rscript`` calls to ``tre_to_stat.R`` for all ARG blocks with TRE files. Adds ``wait`` command every *numJobs* jobs.

``==> bash ./create_stat_files.sh``

* **Setup:**  set total number of haploid samples (*total_n*) and number of haploid samples per species (*species_n*) in  ``tre_to_stat.R`` to fit your data set. Note that RT12 will be set according half of *species_n*. If different species have different *species_n*, then you may need to further adjust script.
* Runs ``tre_to_stat.R`` on all TRE files. Each run applies ``ape::read.tree()`` to read TREE file, and then computes stats for each tree. Resulting file is compressed with ``gzip``.
* Uses auxiliary functions in script ``treeStatFunctions.R``. 
* The stats: [ some stats are coded with specific settings for the input set ]
  * TMRCAH_all - the TMRCAH of the entire sample set (TMRCA of 1/2 of all samples). 
  * RT12 - the smallest TMRCA of *species_n*/2 samples (the 12 originates from the fact that in our data set *species_n*=24).
  * <species>_RTH - the RTH' of each species (one per species), which is the TMRCAH of that species divided by TMRCAH_all
  * <species>_enrich - the enrichment score of each species (one per species), determined using a hypergeometric test.
* **This step is very time consuming.**


------------

Step 5 - Generate Stat BED files
------------

**Input:**

- STAT files  (.STAT.GZ ; generated in **Step 4** above)

**Output:**

- *argStats-windowed/<scaffold>.stat.bed*   -   (STAT BED file; one per scaffold/chromosome)

  [ format for line identical to STAT file (see above) with one line per window and start and end indices of window specified ] 

* *infoTables/scaffold-window-coverage.txt* - (table containing the ranges covered for every scaffold)

**Steps:**

``==> Rscript $scriptDir/make_all_window_stats.R``

- **Setup:**  set the length of non-overlapping windows (default=20,000; should be consistent with setting in **Step 1**)
- Runs script ``window_stats.R`` on all scaffolds with specified window length.
- Writes report on window coverage in *infoTables/scaffold-window-coverage.txt*. If scaffolds have missing ARG blocks, this will be apparent in report.

``==> bash $scriptDir/check_missing_blocks.sh``  (optional)

* **Setup:** set various length parameters based on trimming length and window length (see guidelines in comments) and set the path to a file containing a table with lengths of all scaffolds (to check for missing blocks). See example in *sampleFiles/sporophila-contigs.txt* in root directory. 
* Prints a list of missing blocks in scaffolds. If doesn't print anything, then all scaffolds are fully covered.


------------

Additional scripts
------------

The directory also contains some scripts for computing cross coalescence statistics that are used to detect significant elevation or reduction in corss coalescence times within regions of interest relative to background flanking regions. The general pipeline of SMC files to STAT files does not compute these statistics. They are summarized directly from the tree files in the next phase of the analysis by using two main scripts :

- ``crossCoalFunctions.R``:   Contains various utility functions for computing the youngest cross coalescence in a given tree, the distribution of normalized young CC times in a given list of trees, and the quantile difference between distributions.
- ``window_cross_coal.R``:     Computes average cross coalescence times for each species pair in 20 kb windows along a given region. This is not used in analysis, but can be used for visualization.
- `` cross_coal_per_region.R`` (in the ``summarize_stats`` directory):   Computes the quantile difference between the cross coalescence times in a region of interest and in flanking region (see README.md file of that directory).


------------

